1. Introduction:
With the rapid growth of internet-based services, servers are increasingly exposed to cyber attacks such as brute-force login attempts, unauthorized access, and intrusion attempts. Manual monitoring of server logs is time-consuming and error-prone. Hence, automated log analysis systems play a vital role in detecting suspicious activities at an early stage.
This project presents a GUI-Based Log Analyzer Intrusion Detection System that analyzes server access logs to detect brute-force attacks, classify attack severity, generate incident reports, and visualize attack patterns using graphs.
2. Objectives of the Project:
The main objectives of this project are:
To analyze server access log files automatically
To detect repeated failed login attempts
To identify potential brute-force attacks
To classify attack severity levels
To generate incident and alert reports
To visualize attack behavior using graphs
To provide a user-friendly GUI for analysis
3. Scope of the Project:
This system is designed mainly for educational and demonstration purposes. It can be used as:
A mini Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
A log analyzer for honeypot environments
A cybersecurity laboratory project
A base model for SIEM or IDS systems
The project works on offline log files, making it safe and suitable for learning environments.
4. System Architecture:
Components:
Access Log File (access.log)
Input file containing server request logs
Log Analyzer Module
Parses logs
Detects failed login attempts
Applies time-window logic
Severity Classification Module
LOW / MEDIUM / HIGH severity levels
Report Generator
Generates alert and incident reports
Graph Generator
Visualizes attack attempts per IP
GUI Interface (Tkinter)
User-friendly analysis interface
5. Technologies Used:
Technology
Purpose
Python 3
Core programming language
Tkinter
GUI development
Pandas
Log data processing
Matplotlib
Graph generation
Datetime
Timestamp analysis
6. Methodology:
User selects a log file using GUI
The system reads the access log line by line
Failed login attempts (HTTP 401) are extracted
Attempts are grouped by IP address
Time-window analysis detects brute-force behavior
Severity is assigned based on number of attempts
Reports and graphs are generated automatically
7. Features Implemented:
✔ Log file parsing
✔ Failed login detection
✔ Time-window based attack detection
✔ IP whitelist support
✔ Severity classification
✔ Incident report generation
✔ Alert report generation
✔ Graphical visualization
✔ GUI-based execution
8. Severity Classification Logic:
Attempts
Severity
1–2
LOW
3–4
MEDIUM
≥5
HIGH
9. Output Generated:
alerts.log – Records suspicious IP activity
alert_report.txt – Summary of alerts
incident_report.txt – Detailed incident report
traffic_graph.png – Bar graph of attack attempts
GUI Output Window – Displays detected alerts
10. Sample Output:
[ALERT]
IP Address : 192.168.1.10
Attempts   : 3
Severity   : HIGH
Graph shows failed login attempts per IP address.
11. Advantages of the System:
Easy to use GUI
Automates log analysis
Reduces manual effort
Helps understand attack patterns
Suitable for honeypot and IDS experiments
12. Limitations:
Works on offline log files only
Does not block attackers automatically
No real-time monitoring (can be added later)
13. Future Enhancements:
Real-time log monitoring
Integration with honeypot servers
Automatic IP blocking
Geo-location mapping of attackers
Web-based dashboard
PDF report generation
14. Conclusion
The GUI-Based Log Analyzer Intrusion Detection System successfully detects brute-force login attempts by analyzing server access logs. It provides clear reports, severity classification, and visual graphs, making it a powerful learning tool for cybersecurity students. This project demonstrates the practical application of log analysis in intrusion detection systems.
